# personal-finance-app-API

A REST API that allows users to store safe bank account and transaction information to help view it easily in VSCode, without the ability for anyone to interact with the finances themselves. [Here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1T8ZMjy2xSk) is my video explaining how the project works in under 3 minutes.

## Motivation

This started out from an idea to be able to help my family, through eventually designing a way to have quick access to only the information I need to help them manage their finances into a budget.

## Installation

Inside a Go module:

```bash
go get github.com/MeirionL/personal-finance-api
```

I would also reccomend downloading a REST API client extension like the [Thunder Client](https://www.thunderclient.com/) for this. The below doccumentation will reference curl commands which you can translate to your client extention

## How to start

Inside the project directory create a `.env` file with the following 3 values:

* A `PORT` address number
* A `JWT_SECRET` that can be generated at [Online JWT Generator](https://www.javainuse.com/jwtgenerator)
* A `DB_URL` for a PostgreSQL database in this format: "postgres://<postgres_username>:<postgres_username_password>@localhost:<server_port>/<database_name>?sslmode_disable"

Start the server:

```bash
go build && ./personal-finance-app
```

## What each type of file contains

The `internal` directory contains both my backend authentication code for password hashing (as well as tests for its functions), and all the code generated by the [SQLC](https://github.com/sqlc-dev/sqlc) package in the database directory. 

The `sql` directory contains my queries code for SQLC function generation, as well as all my [goose](https://github.com/pressly/goose) package migrations code.

The `vendor` directory contains information on all the packages my project uses, particularly what versions all my dependencies are on for this project. 

The `dockerignore` file lists what files should not be put in a Docker container.

The `.env` file contains a PORT variable for instructing what port your local server should run on, a DB_URL variable which is a link to connect your project to your Postgres database, and a JWT_SECRET variable that is used in user authentication. For security purposes it's good practise to have these enviroment variables stored in a seperate file that doesn't get uploaded to GitHub and Docker. 

The `.gitignore` file lists files that I want to be ignored when I commit my code to Git and then GitHub.

The `Dockerfile` is a file for creating a Docker container with the project, though I've found that it's currently best obtained through GitHub currently. 

The `go.mod` and `go.sum` files define the Go module for the project. They are both made by Go's module system and they should be updated when the dependencies of a project change. 

All of the `handler_` files contain funcitons for different request handlers. For example the `handler_tranactions_get.go` file contains all the functions in the code pertaining to getting information from the database about its stored transactions. That includes handling the JSON body of the request, filtering if there are any query parameters included, and the fetching and returning of the transaction data the user requests.

The `json.go` file contains the respondWithJSON and respondWithError functions that are used throughout the project. The API uses the former to send a readable response to the user in the format of a JSON body, and the latter function creates an appropriate JSON body response if ever there is an error within the code. The `json_test.go` file simply has some basic testing for the respondWithJSON function.

The `main.go` file is what gets run when the project is run (as shown earlier in this file). It contains a main function that loads in a number of enviroment variables, connects to the database, sets up an apiConfig, creates an appropriate router, defines all the routes in the API, and then runs the server that waits for a users request.

The `middleware_auth.go` file contains the middleware that's attached to the authRouter in the main.go file. It checks any request to the authRouter to see if it has a valid access token in its header to help authenticate the user and determine wether they're authorized to make the request they've submitted. 

The `models.go` file contains functions that apply JSON tags to the parameters returned by the SQLC generated functions, since without them the respondWithJSON function won't be able to appropriately handle the returned structs.

The `sqlc.yaml` file defines various aspects of how the SQLC package should generate code for the project. In this case it just describes where the SQL input code is in the project, and where the generated Go code from that SQL code should go. 

## __Requests__

| Request | Description |
| --- | --- |
| GET health | Show status of server |
| GET error | Show error handler is working |
| POST user | Create user with name, password and ID |
| GET users | Show info of all users |
| GET user by ID | Show specific user based on ID parameter |
| POST login | Take in user info to return valid refresh token and access token. Refresh token is valid for 60 days and access token is valid for an hour. **One of these tokens is required for all of the below commands** |
| PUT user | Update user info with new name and/or password |
| DELETE user | Delete user and all related accounts and transactions |
| POST refresh | Create new valid access token if valid refresh token provided |
| POST revoke token | Revoke currently used refresh token |
| GET revoked tokens | Show all revoked tokens for current user |
| POST account | Create account with name and current account details |
| GET accounts | Show current accounts for user. Can filter to show an account based on bank details or account ID |
| PUT account | Update account name and/or balance |
| DELETE account | DELETE account with entered account_ID parameter |
| GET balances | Show balances of all accounts for user |
| POST transaction | Create transaction with time, type, amount, pre and post balance and info about "other account" involved |
GET transactions | Show all transactions for desired account in order of most recent. Can filter to specific transactions by providing bank details, transaction ID, "others account" ID, transactions type, or a limit of how many you wish to show |
DELETE transaction | Delete specific transaction from account |
| GET "others account" | Show all accounts that desired user account has transactions with. Can filter to find individual "others accounts" by providing bank details or "other account" ID |

### GET healthz

    curl -i -X GET "http://localhost:<PORT>/healthz"

### GET error

    curl -i -X GET "http://localhost:<PORT>/err"

### POST user

    curl -i -H 'Accept: application/json' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -X POST -d '{"name":"Foo","password":"Bar"}' "http://localhost:<PORT>/users"

### GET users

    curl -i -X GET "http://localhost:<PORT>/users"

### GET user by ID

    curl -i -X GET "http://localhost:<PORT>/users/<userID>"

### POST login

    curl -H 'Accept: application/json' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -X POST -d '{"id": 123,"password":"Foo"}' "http://localhost:<PORT>/login"

### PUT user

    curl -i -H 'Accept: application/json' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X PUT -d '{"name":"Foo","password":"Bar"}' "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/users"

### DELETE user

    curl -i -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X DELETE "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/users"

### Refresh token

    curl -i -H 'Authorization: Bearer <REFRESH_TOKEN>' -X POST "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/refresh"

### Revoke refresh token

    curl -i -H 'Authorization: Bearer <REFRESH_TOKEN>' -X POST "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/revoke"

### GET revoked tokens

    curl -i -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X GET "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/revoke"

### POST account

    curl -i -H 'Accept: application/json' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X POST -d '{"account_name":"Foo","balance":123.456, "account_number":"12345678", "sort_code":"12-34-56"}' "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/accounts"

### GET accounts

    curl -i -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X GET "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/accounts"

Optionally you can filter the returned accounts by adding these optional parameters on the end of the route:

    ?account_number=12345678&sort_code=12-34-56

    ?id=<ACCOUNT_ID>

### PUT account

    curl -i -H 'Accept: application/json' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X PUT -d '{"id":"<ACCOUNT_ID>", "account_name":"new_account_name","balance":123.456}' "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/accounts"

### DELETE account

    curl -i -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X DELETE "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/accounts/<ACCOUNT_ID>"

### GET accounts balances

    curl -i -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X GET "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/balances"

### POST transaction

    curl -i -H 'Accept: application/json' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X POST -d '{"transaction_time":"YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SSZ","transaction_type":"outgoing","amount":12.30,"pre_balance":45.60,"post_balance":78.90,"new_account":true,"account_name":"Foo","account_number":"12345678","sort_code":"12-34-56","account_id":"<ACCOUNT_ID>"}' "http://"localhost:<PORT>/auth/transactions

__Time format placeholders breakdown:__

* YYYY is the year
* MM is the month
* DD is the day
* T splits data and time and should be left as is
* HH is the hour in 24-hour format
* Second MM is the minutes
* SS is the seconds
* Z indicates UTC time and should be left as is

### GET transactions

    curl -i -H 'Accept: application/json' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X GET -d '{"account_id":"<ACCOUNT_ID>"}' "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/transactions"

Optionally you can filter the returned transactions by adding these optional parameters on the end of the route:

    ?transaction_id=<TRANSACTION_ID>

    ?transaction_type=incoming

    ?account_number=12345678&sort_code=12-34-56

    ?limit=123

    ?others_account_id=<OTHER_ACCOUNT_ID>

### DELETE transaction

    curl -i -H 'Accept: application/json' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X DELETE -d '{"account_id":"<ACCOUNT_ID>"}' "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/transactions/<TRANSACTION_ID>"

### GET others account

    curl -i -H 'Accept: application/json' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'Authorization: Bearer <ACCESS_TOKEN>' -X GET -d '{"account_id":"<ACCOUNT_ID>"}'  "http://localhost:<PORT>/auth/others"

Optionally you can filter the returned transactions by adding these optional parameters on the end of the route:

    ?account_number=12345678&sort_code=12-34-56

    ?id=<OTHERS_ACCOUNT_ID>